[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I researched all the
literature on the occupational
exposure of dentists to amalgam,
and ended up writing a paper
as a result of that research--
that was published--
on exposure, predominantly,
to particulate matter.
As dentists drill out a
filling, their dental drill
runs at about 400,000 RPM.
And it sends a shower of
micron-size and sub-micron-size
particles everywhere.
It's tens of thousands
of parts per million.
There was literature,
actually, that
measured the amount of
particulate matter in the air
space or the breathing zone
of a dentist during removals.
And a researcher had studied
this using mannequins
into which they had put in fake
teeth with fillings in them,
and then drilled them out and
taken all the measurements
while they were doing it.
And the dose of particulate
matter experienced by dentists
if they don't take
precautions is huge.
It's way larger than
the vapor exposure
they get during
the same process.
Particulate exposure
for a single filling
delivers micrograms of
mercury, which in mercury terms
is a lot.
And this happens--
you know, at the time,
the average was around four
to five fillings were removed
by a typical dentist
in any given day,
so that he could replace
them or whatever.
And if they-- even if they
wear the typical surgical mask,
they're designed to stop
particles of around three
microns in size or
larger, because that's
the size of typical bacteria.
Well, the particles of amalgam
pass right through that mask,
because they're well
less than three microns.
They average around one
and 1/2 microns in size,
and go down to the
sub-micron level.
The amalgam load would
probably give them
100 times more
exposure to mercury
than just inhaling
the vapor that
is present at the same time.
The particle load
carries an un-- well,
50% of the mass of any
particular particle is mercury.
And that's delivered
straight to the lungs,
and it's absorbed
within three days.
And the mass is quite large.
And it stays there--
as opposed to the mercury
vapor, drops off fairly quickly.
Amalgam particles that
have been inhaled,
they don't dissipate anywhere
but directly into the body.
So the dose delivered is
very, very significant.
[MUSIC PLAYING]